Thank you. Welcome to the Mesa City
Council meeting for April 6th, 2026.
Council member GoForth is unable to
attend and is excused. Council member
Heredia is participating by Zoom.
Otherwise, all other council members are
present.
We'll begin this meeting with a moment
of silence followed by the pledge of
allegiance. So, I'd ask please stand.
Thank you. Please join me in the pledge
of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the
republic for which it stands, one nation
under God, indivisible, with liberty and
justice for all.
Thank you. At Arizona Forward recently,
the city of Mesa received two
environmental excellent awards.
And we have city staff here, Katherine
Bloomquist and Stacy Bass, as well as
representative from the Nature
Conservancy here.
Michaela is here. And so, I'd like to
invite up um
Mr. Bouchey and Lauren, are you here to
help talk about the awards
and the importance of it and share share
us about it. And then we're going to
come down with council and take some
pictures.
All right.
Good evening, Mayor and Council. My name
is Lauren Whiticker. I'm the deputy
director for environmental and
sustainability. I'm here with Scott
Bouchey, director for energy and
sustainability.
I wanted to take just a couple minutes
this evening to celebrate two awards the
city recently won at the Arizona Forward
Environmental Excellence Awards Gala
held on March 21st.
Mesa received the highest honor, a Chris
Cordy Award, for our Mesa Youth Climate
Action Fund.
Um which is we won the category of
curriculum-based and youth environmental
education.
The Mesa Youth Climate Action Fund is
grant-funded by Bloomberg Philanthropies
and Mesa has received $150,000 from
Bloomberg. In turn, Mesa awards micro
grants to youth uh in the amount of $1
to $5,000.
And youth go out into uh work with
community partners like Child Crisis
Center or Mesa Public Schools
to implement sustainable and resilient
projects for Mesa.
A amazing program that engages the
community,
builds confidence and workforce ready
skills for youth, and creates a more
sustainable environment for all of Mesa.
Some of the stories from this program
are particularly heartwarming for me. Um
and uh the impact to the community and
youth has been tremendous.
The second award was won for the Reed
Park Greening Project in the category of
heat mitigation.
Um we received an award of distinction.
Um the Reed Park Greening Project took
place last October and over 100
community members showed up to plant 94
desert-adapted trees, 35 native shrubs,
and build three storm water uh capture
basins for green storm water
infrastructure.
But what made Reed Park Greening Project
so special, it was beyond just a regular
tree planting event. Uh it was truly an
innovative partnership and city of Mesa
partnered with over five uh
organizations and community partners.
That includes the Nature Conservancy who
submitted the award and is here today.
Um Unlimited Potential, Trees Matter,
Watershed Management Group, and Arizona
Sustainability Alliance.
We The project was also supported by the
Garden Club of America.
We hope this project will serve as a
template for future collaboration
between municipalities, nonprofits, and
community-based organizations to
increase urban shade and make our city
more resilient in the face of uh
increasing heat. So, thank you to Mayor
Freeman and Council member Duff for
attending and all of council for
supporting these initiatives. Uh we hope
to continue award-winning initiatives
like this into the future. So. Thank
you, Lauren. Yes, of course. Um shall we
go down with council and take a picture?
Uh Mr. Bouchey, did you want to say
anything?
>> Nope. Lauren covered I covered it all.
Great.
All right. Let's go, council.
>> [applause]
>> Thank you again for all the hard work
and
all the different uh
people that work so hard on this. And
I'm we're so glad that you're
we have the opportunity as a city to
participate in these programs.
With that, we'll move over to the
consent agenda. Mr. Christopher,
I know there's some off the consent
agenda.
Yep. 4C, 4D, 5A, 6A, and 7B is what I
have.
4C, 4D, 5A, 6A, and 7B. Yep. All right.
Go ahead, sir. Good evening, Mayor and
Council members. These are the items on
the consent agenda. All items listed
with an asterisk will be considered as a
group by the City Council and will be
enacted with one motion. There will be
no separate discussion unless a council
member or a citizen requests it, in
which event the item will be removed
from the consent agenda and considered
as a separate item. Item two, approval
of minutes of previous meetings as
written. Items 3A and 3B, acting on
liquor license applications for the
Guadalupe on Main, 1526 East Main
Street. Item 4A, approving 3-year term
contract with 2-year renewal options for
welding certification and inspection
services for the Energy Resources
Department. Item 4B, approving 3-year
contract with 2-year renewal options for
street light parts and electrical
supplies for the Transportation
Department. Items 4C and 4D have been
removed from the consent agenda. Item 5A
has been removed from the consent
agenda. Item 5B, approving resolution
authorizing the sale of certain
city-owned real property located at 8130
East Redbird in Mesa and authorizing the
city manager to enter into necessary
deal agreement deal documents. Item 5C,
approving resolution authorizing the
issuance and sale of general obligation
bonds, series 2026.
Item 5D, approving resolution
authorizing the sale, execution, and
delivery of utility systems revenue
refunding obligations, series 2026. Item
5E, approving resolution authorizing the
sale, execution, and delivery of utility
systems revenue obligations, series
2026. Item 5F, approving resolution
authorizing the city manager or designee
to purchase and contract with a
qualified electric power supplier via
auction. Item 6A has been removed from
the consent agenda. Item 7A, approving
ordinance rezoning case 25-774
for property located at the northwest
corner of Ray Road and South 71st
Street. This is for a major site plan
modification and amending conditions of
approval number one and number two of
ordinance 5699 to allow for an
industrial building. Item 7B has been
removed from the consent agenda. Mayor
and Council members, these are the items
on the consent agenda.
Thank you, Mr. Christopher.
Council, I'll entertain a a motion to
approve the consent agenda.
Thank you, Mr. Adams. Thank you, Vice
Mayor. Please cast your vote.
Mr. Heredia, how do you vote?
I.
I. Okay.
Thank you. Motion passes.
With that, we'll move over to the
agenda items pulled off.
4C, I have I know a James Markham that
wish to speak. Noah, if you'll come
forward.
Oh my goodness.
Is this on? Oh, no.
>> [laughter]
>> Aloha, Mayor, and to the rest of the
City Council.
Um
4C, item 4C, um I really like this item.
It's a really good item to have um and
to keep our our streets clean um in Mesa
because, you know, it it gets really
dirty in Arizona. So, yeah, I like this
one. So, thank you so much.
Thank you, Noah. Council, I'll entertain
a motion to approve item 4C.
Thank you, Vice Mayor. Thank you, Ms.
Duff. Please cast your vote.
Mr. Heredia.
Oh, I. Okay. Motion passes. Thank you.
Uh next, we'll move over to item 4D. Uh
that's Air Park and Whitman Park
playground renovation. I have a Noah
James Markham that wish to speak.
>> [clears throat]
>> Um aloha, Mayor, again to the rest of
the city council.
Um, 4D I really do like this too because
I seen a lot of, you know, I I'm from
Gilbert and I know they do a great job
with our parks there.
Um, but
I just hope we do better with our parks
here in Mesa too so it doesn't look so
ghetto. But yeah, I like this um,
renovation and yeah, thank you so much.
Okay, with that we'll move forward to
item 4D.
Pardon?
There is a motion for item 4D. Thank
you, Ms. Taylor. Thank you, Ms. Duff.
All in favor say I.
Or vote. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Eddie. Motion passes.
All right, the next item is item 5A.
I have a Noah James Markham wishes to
speak setting a public hearing date to
review the proposed annual assessments
for Mesa Town Center.
Noah, what do you have to say? Uh, you
know,
>> [laughter]
>> aloha um, mayor and to the rest of the
city council. So, um, I yes, I I hope
that we do better with the
uh, Mesa Town Center and please improve
it because I just don't want
Mesa to look
ghetto. So, um, yeah. [laughter]
And that's it. So, thank you so much.
Okay then, uh, 5A council uh, motion
to approve item 5A
by vice mayor seconded by Ms. Duff.
Please cast your vote.
I. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Eddie.
Motion passes.
>> [clears throat]
>> Next one is item 6A. 6A is a rezone Real
Salado 25 3.1 acres located northwest
corner of West Real Salado Parkway and
North Cubs Way.
I have one person that wishes to speak
and that would be Noah James Markham.
Um, aloha mayor again. Um, to the rest
of the city council. Um, 6A is a great
one even though I don't like the Cubs. I
like the Yankees and the Arizona
Diamondbacks. Um, but yes, I like this
for the Cubs. So, yes.
I approve it. Thank you. Thank you,
Noah, for approving.
Um, we will entertain an item to approve
item 6A. Thank you, Ms. Duff. Thank you,
vice mayor. Please cast your vote.
I.
Thank you, Mr. Eddie. Motion passes.
Next we'll move on to item 7B.
RMCD Dance Studio uh, located
southeast corner of East Warner Road and
South Mountain Road. I have one person
who wishes to speak.
Noah James Markham. Noah, you're five
for five.
Yes, aloha uh,
the
Mark Freeman uh, mayor um, and to the
rest of the city council. Um, I like
this. I love dancing even though,
you know, some people would call me a
but it's all right. Um, I like
this and I you know, we need to spread
the joy in Mesa. So, yes, I like this
one. Thank you.
Well again, Noah, thank you for
approving that. So, with that uh,
council entertain a motion to
approve item 7B. Thank you, vice mayor.
Thank you, Ms. Duff. Please cast your
vote.
Mr. Eddie.
I. I. Okay, motion passes.
Thank you, everyone, for your voting.
Next we'll move on to items from citizen
present. I have three speakers.
The first one is a Reggie Brown. Reggie,
you're up first followed by Peter, I
think Dutra or Duder. Dutra.
Reggie, uh, Peter, you're on deck.
A few housekeeping things uh, real
quick. Can you hear me okay?
Um,
I just want to say that we've been
talking about AI and other things. Just
talk about our generation of what it is
now. When we were growing up, we were
told not to get in the car with a
stranger. These days that's what we do
with Uber. Back then we were told that
what we do would be on our permanent
record.
That's what the internet is today.
I'm again of course talking about the
287G fiduciary and economic impact.
The GEM model is currently operating a
state of fiduciary fraud where pros I
pros narrative is contradiction to the
city's own data.
Uh, one thing I'd like to talk about
people talk about illegality and crime.
So, at a 14% drop in crime, we had a
287G transfer double to 253 transfers.
So, for a 14% citywide shift in
population of 512,000,
right?
So, it is 81% of transfers have no prior
criminal history with MPD. So, shifting
this program from a criminal removal to
a labor liquidation.
You see, uh, Mesa has a brand. This
brand is used for anything from anybody
moving here or anybody investing here.
We're everyone's talking about
international investment whether it be
for industrial or otherwise which is the
most pertinent for you guys right now.
When they look at whether they're going
to build here, they're going to look at
the basics, right? How long will it take
me from approval to actual building?
When will that building be complete?
Now, they're going to run into a few
things that is well known for Arizona.
We have clay rich soil which is
difficult to
uh, to work. There's a
uh, geological CAPEX which is called.
Now, when you get to these high labor
situations, we see that the Latino work
force is 31%.
Uh, they are also a majority of our
sheetrock wallers. And if anybody
believes that if they're eliminated from
the job force that they will be replaced
by other people who will work for
cheaper, that's just inaccurate. We see
that in 2024.
Pinal County tried to put in a task
force. As a result in
January 9th, the Associated Builders
Association noticed a 22% drop in
skilled trade.
Pinal County we're we're
intricately absorbed with them in our
economics. Our workers go back and
forth.
Now, again, the highest uh, sorry
incarceration and and deportation is at
our people who have not had any criminal
previous criminal record.
This means that we are removing from our
economy people who work jobs and
contribute.
>> [clears throat]
>> I've also covered expenses for the MOA.
But in my few seconds here I would like
to talk about a failure to meet my PRR
requests. We're at 104 days for me for
asking ethnicities, reasons for arrest,
time for detention, and other anonymous
information.
This is exactly Reggie, your time's up.
Thank you. I just want to quote the ARS.
>> day. Your time's up. Thank you.
>> Peter.
Thank you and followed after Peter is
a Noah James Markham.
Mr. Mayor, council members, thank you
for this opportunity to speak about a
very important matter.
Certain elements here in Mesa are
attempting to have our 287G agreement
with ICE rescinded. This is a
long-standing partnership signed in 2009
under the first Obama administration
that is vital to the safety and security
of our great city.
We have been subjected to example after
example of the dangers, chaos, and
lawlessness that non-cooperation
presents to any city
over the last year. The simple fact that
any reasonable person can understand
is that we are a city, state, and nation
of laws.
When any individual entity unilaterally
decides to take these laws into its own
hands or worse still to break these
laws, the outcome is predictable and
tragic.
We must cooperate with federal law
enforcement whether it be ICE, CBP, or
FBI.
To do otherwise places our fellow
citizens as well as the subjects in
force of enforcement at grave risk.
Releasing criminals onto our streets and
requiring ICE to track them down and
attempt to detain them increases the
risk for law enforcement, innocent
bystanders, and the criminals
themselves.
The orderly transfer of custody while
still detained is a safer and more
humane avenue of enforcement.
On the other hand, there are example
after example of cities who honor their
287G agreements and their streets have
remained peaceful, their citizens secure
and safe, and their voters receiving
exactly what they voted for.
To end our 287G agreement will put Mesa
at risk of experiencing a surge of
federal law enforcement descending on
our city as we have seen in the lawless
and failed so-called sanctuary cities
throughout this nation.
The simple fact is that a majority of
voters in this city, state, and nation
voted clearly and decisively for these
laws to be enforced and for the federal
government to take back our country our
country from the unconstitutional legal
open border policies of the previous
administration.
We must resist the very vocal minority
that obeys only one rule to use vitriol,
anger, hate, division, intimidation, and
even violence to silence anyone who
disagrees with them.
The majority of the citizens of Mesa, of
Arizona, and of the United States are
law-abiding, peaceful, hard-working
people who just want to live in a city
and country that respects the rule of
law, is obedient to our great
Constitution,
and places the welfare of their families
and their fellow citizens above all
else.
Therefore, I strongly urge you to resist
any attempt to rescind our 287G
agreement that if successful will only
diminish this great city and place every
single citizen in danger.
Thank you for your time and
consideration. The voters of Mesa, your
constituents, eagerly await your
decision. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh Noah James Markum, our last
[clears throat] speaker.
Aloha, Mayor and to the rest of the City
Council.
Um I am a strong
Democrat.
And I know that I've said some things
about my Congressman Greg Stanton, but
I do agree that we do need the 287G
agreement. And I'm very grateful that
Greg Stanton, as a Democrat, has
done his job as Congressman.
I'm very proud of that.
I'm not proud of the way that the
Republicans have handled the 287G
agreement. We've had Barack Obama,
President Biden. They've done a great
job with the ICE agreement. But it's
just the Republicans, and I could not
you know, Republicans could be
Republicans. If you want to stand on
that side, you can. But I am not a
Republican, and I'm so thankful that the
the Democrats have done something with
the ICE agreement right.
And then, since I asked for this
agreement, this continuum, that I asked
that we extend the the light rail in
Mesa
far, please.
Also, there's another thing cuz there's
a failure, you know, when I go into a
store and I take my shirt off, people
have that weird audacity to
>> [laughter]
>> think it's, you know, a weird thing to
do. But I, you know, I think it should
be appropriate. It's hot outside. I, you
know, it's
heat season.
Also, I know that people are talking
about um
the Palo District, too. Um I am so
excited. I am so excited for this. I'm
ex- so excited for the soccer stadium,
too. Oh my goodness, I I love sports. Um
and I, you know, I hear a lot about the
women's stuff going on, so I am excited
for women out there. Also, um
there's one more thing I would like to
add. Um we should add more citizen
presence. And if you're Republican, you
know, we do like freedom, right? But I
don't know if you will, because I don't
know if you do like freedom. So, maybe
you should
uh
>> [clears throat]
>> add more citizen presence. So, thank you
so much. Thank you, Noah. Uh Council,
that's all the items we have for
tonight. Is there a motion to adjourn?
Thank you, Vice Mayor. Thank you, Ms.
Taylor. All in favor, say I. I. Ms.
Heredia.
All right, we're adjourned. Thank you.
>> [music]